Ps shortcut doc (#209)
mlr-org/mlr3book: bookdown/03-optimization-searchspace.Rmd

## Tuning Search Spaces {#searchspace}

When running an optimization, it is important to inform the tuning algorithm about what hyperparameters are valid. Here the names, types, and valid ranges of each hyperparameter are important. All this information is communicated with objects of the class `r ref("ParamSet")`, which is defined in `r mlr_pkg("paradox")`. While it is possible to create `r ref("ParamSet")`-objects using its `$new`-constructor, it is much shorter and readable to use the `r ref("ps")`-shortcut, which will be presented here. For an in-depth description of `r mlr_pkg("paradox")` and its classes, see the [`paradox` chapter](#paradox).

> An important distinction to keep in mind when defining `r ref("ParamSet")` objects is whether these objects are used to define a search space for tuning, or whether they are only used to check the validity of values. The `minsplit` parameter of the `r ref("mlr_learners_classif.rpart", "classif.rpart Learner")`, for example, has a lower but no upper bound. When tuning the value, however, a lower *and* upper bound must be given because tuning search spaces need to have finite measure. `r ref("ParamSet")` objects are used to describe both the search spaces of tuning runs, and the valid parameter ranges of `Learner`s and other objects. Therefore it is possible to create "unbounded" `r ref("ParamSet", text = "ParamSets")`, mostly in advanced usecases like creating or modifying `r ref("Learner")` or `r ref("PipeOp")` objects. Here, however, we will mainly focus on creating "bounded" `r ref("ParamSet", text = "ParamSets")` that can be used for tuning. See the [in-depth `paradox` chapter](#paradox) for more details on using `r ref("ParamSet", text = "ParamSets")` to  valid hyperparameter ranges for use-cases besides tuning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note, that `r ref("ParamSet")` objects exist in two contexts.
First, `r ref("ParamSet")`-objects are used to define the space of valid parameter setting for a learner (and other objects).
Second, they are used to define a search space for tuning.
We are mainly interested in the latter.
For an example we can consider the `minsplit` parameter of the `r ref("mlr_learners_classif.rpart", "classif.rpart Learner").
The `r ref("ParamSet")` associated with the learner has a lower but *no* upper bound.
However, for tuning the value, a lower *and* upper bound must be given because tuning search spaces need to be bounded. 
For `r ref("Learner")` or `r ref("PipeOp")` objects, typically "unbounded" `r ref("ParamSet", text = "ParamSets")` are used.
Here, however, we will mainly focus on creating "bounded" `r ref("ParamSet", text = "ParamSets")` that can be used for tuning. 
See the [in-depth `paradox` chapter](#paradox) for more details on using `r ref("ParamSet", text = "ParamSets")` to  define parameter ranges for use-cases besides tuning.
```
one line per sentence would help here :)

```{r 03-optimization-searchspace-004}
tune_ps = ps(
  cost = p_dbl(-1, 1, trafo = function(x) 10^x),
  kernel = p_fct(c("polynomial", "radial"))
)
rbindlist(generate_design_grid(tune_ps, 3)$transpose())
```

It is even possible to attach another transformation to the `r ref("ParamSet")` as a whole that gets executed after individual parameter's transformations were performed. It is given through the `.extra_trafo` argument and should be a function with parameters `x` and `param_set` that takes a list of parameter values in `x` and returns a modified list. This transformation can access all parameter values of an evaluation and modify them with interactions. It is even possible to add or remove parameters. (The following is a bit of a silly example.)

```{r 03-optimization-searchspace-005}
tune_ps = ps(
  cost = p_dbl(-1, 1, trafo = function(x) 10^x),
  kernel = p_fct(c("polynomial", "radial")),
  .extra_trafo = function(x, param_set) {
    if (x$kernel == "polynomial") {
      x$cost = x$cost * 2
    }
    x
  }
)
rbindlist(generate_design_grid(tune_ps, 3)$transpose())
```

> The available types of search space parameters is limited: continuous, integer, discrete, and logical scalars. There are many machine learning algorithms, however, that take parameters of other types, for example vectors or functions. These can not be defined in a search space `r ref("ParamSet")`, and they are often given as `r ref("ParamUty")` when defining a `r ref("Learner")`'s `r ref("ParamSet")`. When trying to tune over these hyperparameters, it is necessary to perform a Transformation that changes the type of a parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The available types of search space parameters are limited: continuous, integer, discrete, and logical scalars. There are many machine learning algorithms, however, that take parameters of other types, for example vectors or functions. These can not be defined in a search space `r ref("ParamSet")`, and they are often given as `r ref("ParamUty")` in the `r ref("Learner")`'s `r ref("ParamSet")`. When trying to tune over these hyperparameters, it is necessary to perform a Transformation that changes the type of a parameter.
```

An example is the `class.weights` parameter of the SVM, which takes a named vector of class weights with one entry for each target class. The trafo that would tune `class.weights` for the `r ref("mlr_tasks_spam", "tsk(\"spam\")")` dataset could be:

```{r 03-optimization-searchspace-006}
tune_ps = ps(
  class.weights = p_dbl(0.1, 0.9, trafo = function(x) c(spam = x, nonspam = 1 - x))
)
generate_design_grid(tune_ps, 3)$transpose()
```

(We are omitting `rbindlist()` in this example because it breaks the vector valued return elements.)

### Automatic Factor Level Transformation {#autolevel}

> A common use-case is the necessity to specify a list of values that should all be tried (or sampled from). It may be the case that a hyperparameter takes on function values and a certain list of functions should be tried. Or it may be that a choice of special numeric values should be used. For this, the `p_fct` constructor's `level` argument may be a value that is not a `character` vector, but something else. If, for example, only the values `0.1`, `3`, and `10` should be tried for the `cost` parameter, even when doing random search, then the following search space would achieve that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common use-case is the necessity to specify a list of values that should all be tried (or sampled from). It may be the case that a hyperparameter accepts function objects as values and a certain list of functions should be tried. Or it may be that a choice of special numeric values should be tried. For this, the `p_fct` constructor's `level` argument may be a value that is not a `character` vector, but something else. If, for example, only the values `0.1`, `3`, and `10` should be tried for the `cost` parameter, even when doing random search, then the following search space would achieve that:
```

```{r 03-optimization-searchspace-010}
tune_ps = ps(
  class.weights = p_fct(
    list(
      candidate_a = c(spam = 0.5, nonspam = 0.5),
      candidate_b = c(spam = 0.3, nonspam = 0.7)
    )
  )
)
generate_design_grid(tune_ps)$transpose()
```

### Parameter Dependencies (`requires`) {#searchspace-requires}

Some parameters are only relevant when another parameter has a certain value, or one of several values. The SVM, for example, has the `degree` parameter that is only valid when `kernel` is `"polynomial"`. This can be specified using the `requires` argument. It is an expression that must involve other parameters and be of the form `<param> == <scalar>`, `<param> %in% <vector>`, or multiple of these chained by `&&`. To tune the `degree` parameter, one would need to do the following:

```{r 03-optimization-searchspace-011}
tune_ps = ps(
  cost = p_dbl(-1, 1, trafo = function(x) 10^x),
  kernel = p_fct(c("polynomial", "radial")),
  degree = p_int(1, 3, requires = kernel == "polynomial")
)
rbindlist(generate_design_grid(tune_ps, 3)$transpose(), fill = TRUE)
```

> ### Tuning ParamSets from other ParamSets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create Tuning ParamSets from other ParamSets
```

> Having to define a `r ref("ParamSet")` for a `r ref("Learner")` that already has parameter set information may seem unnecessarily tedious, and there is indeed a way to create tuning `r ref("ParamSet", "ParamSets")` from a `r ref("Learner")`'s `r ref("ParamSet")`, making use of as much information as already available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having to define a tuning `r ref("ParamSet")` for a `r ref("Learner")` that already has parameter set information may seem unnecessarily tedious, and there is indeed a way to create tuning `r ref("ParamSet", "ParamSets")` from a `r ref("Learner")`'s `r ref("ParamSet")`, making use of as much information as already available.
```

search_space = ps()
print(search_space)
```

`r ref("ps")` takes named `r ref("Domain")` arguments that are turned into parameters. A possible search space for the `"classif.svm"` learner could for example be:

```{r 03-optimization-searchspace-001}
search_space = ps(
  cost = p_dbl(lower = 0.1, upper = 10),
  kernel = p_fct(levels = c("polynomial", "radial"))
)
print(search_space)
```

There are five domain constructors that produce a parameters when given to `r ref("ps")`:

| Constructor               | Description                 | Is bounded?                | Underlying Class           |
| :-----------------------: | :-------------------------: | :------------------------: | :------------------------: |
| `p_dbl`                   | Real valued parameter ("double") | When `upper` and `lower` are given | `r ref("ParamDbl")` |
| `p_int`                   | Integer parameter           | When `upper` and `lower` are given | `r ref("ParamInt")`    |
| `p_fct`                   | Discrete valued parameter ("factor") | Always            | `r ref("ParamFct")` |
| `p_lgl`                   | Logical / Boolean parameter | Always                     | `r ref("ParamLgl")`    |

> | `p_uty`                   | Untyped parameter           | Never                      | `r ref("ParamUty")`    |

Reviewer 2: Can this table to formatted so that column widths match their contents? Many editors have auto-formatters for this.
